README.md, before:

# GENIE: Gaussian Encoding for Neural Radiance Fields Interactive Editing

👋 Hi there!  
If you’ve landed here looking to **edit NeRFs** (Neural Radiance Fields) you’re in the right place. This project lets you 🛠️ interactively modify NeRF scenes with ease.  
Feel free to explore 🔍, clone the repo 📦, and start experimenting 🚀. Contributions, issues, and ideas are always welcome! 💡✨

<p align="center">
  <img src="images/teaser.png" alt="Description" width="400"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img src="images/Ficus_leaf_wind.gif" width="22%" />
  <img src="images/Hotdog_fly.gif" width="22%" />
  <img src="images/pillow_duck.gif" width="22%" />
  <img src="images/Rug_cup.gif" width="22%" />
</p>

# ⚙️ Installation

This project is developed as an extension for Nerfstudio. To get started, please install [Nerfstudio](https://github.com/nerfstudio-project/nerfstudio/tree/2adcc380c6c846fe032b1fe55ad2c960e170a215) along with its dependencies. <br>

<p align="center">
    <!-- pypi-strip -->
    <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://docs.nerf.studio/_images/logo-dark.png">
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="https://docs.nerf.studio/_images/logo.png">
    <!-- /pypi-strip -->
    <img alt="nerfstudio" src="https://docs.nerf.studio/_images/logo.png" width="400">
    <!-- pypi-strip -->
    </picture>
    <!-- /pypi-strip -->
</p>


Install [OptiX SDK 8.1.0](https://developer.nvidia.com/designworks/optix/downloads/legacy) in `genie/knn` directory.
Then build the CUDA code by running:
``` bash
./build_optix.sh
```
> ⚠️ If the build fails, please double-check that the paths to the OptiX SDK and CUDA include directories are correct in build_optix.sh.
We have tested with OptiX 7.6 and 8.1.0. OptiX 9.0 is not supported at the moment.

Finally, install this repo with:
``` bash
pip install -e .
ns-install-cli
```
🚀 This will install the package in editable mode and kick off the Nerfstudio CLI installer to get you all set up and ready to go! 🎉

### Optional Installation
If you want to experiment 🧪 with different KNN algorithms you can install [Faiss](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/tree/main). We found GPU acceleration wasn’t working out-of-the-box, so we had to compile Faiss from source with Python bindings for it to work properly. <br>

Also, uncomment the Faiss import and two KNN classes in `genie/knn/knn_algorithms.py` to enable it. Then in `genie_config.py` you can specify different KNN.

# Running the demo
To test if everything was installed properly, you can run the `ficus` demo. Please download the data from [here] and put it in data folder.

```bash
# First train the model with
ns-train genie --data data/ficus --timestamp genie_demo

# Now you can render the animation
genie-render dataset --load-config outputs/ficus/genie/genie_demo/config.yml --rendered-output-names rgb --output-path edits/genie_demo --selected-camera-idx 50

# Render the video
ffmpeg -framerate 24 -i %05d.jpg -c:v libx264 -pix_fmt yuv420p ficus_wind.mp4
```

# Data preparation
### Synthetic data
By default, our method supports the NeRF Synthetic format. If you want to use your own data you need to put `sparse_pc.ply` in the dataset folder. For synthetic data we used [LagHash](https://github.com/theialab/lagrangian_hashes) to generate the initial point cloud but COLMAP sparse point cloud works just as fine if you don't want to train another model.

### Real data
For real data please follow [Nerfstudio data format](https://docs.nerf.studio/quickstart/data_conventions.html)
To use the MiP-NeRF 360 dataset, you'll need to generate a `transforms.json` file for each scene:
``` bash
# Do this for every dataset in the folder
cd <dataset_folder>
ns-process-data images --data . --output-dir . --skip-colmap --skip-image-processin --colmap-model-path sparse/0
```
Like with synthetic data, you'll also need to place `sparse_pc.ply` in the dataset folder to initialize the network with a sparse point cloud.

# Training the network

Example train commands:
``` bash
# For nerf synthetic
ns-train genie --data <path_to_dataset>

# For MiP-NeRF but also other real data
ns-train genie --data <path_to_dataset> \
  --pipeline.model.near-plane 0.0 \
  --pipeline.model.far-plane 1000 \
  --pipeline.model.background-color random \
  --pipeline.model.disable-scene-contraction False \
  --pipeline.model.cone-angle 0.00390625 \
  nerfstudio-data \
  --load-3D-points True \
  --downscale-factor 4
```

# Rendering results
We use [Blender](https://www.blender.org) for generating our animations. It is important to generate for each frame of your animation an `*.ply` file containing modified Gaussians obtained from the training. You can find them in the output foledr of your training under the name `step-<num_steps>_means.ply`. 

> ⚠️  It is very important to use only `*.ply` files since they don't change the order of vertices upon the save.

In the output folder of your trained model (usually named wit the timestamp) create `camera_path` folder and put your `*.ply` filed there. It is important to name them `00000.ply`, `00001.ply`, `00002.ply`, etc.

Now you are ready to go and you can start rednerin. You have two option right here:
### Dataset Render
``` bash
genie-render dataset \
  --load-config outputs/<path_to_your_config.yml> \
  --output-path edits/<output_folder> \
  --rendered-output-names rgb \
  --selected-camera-idx <num_camera_from_test_data>
```
 - If you specify a camera index, all frames will be rendered from that viewpoint.
 - If not, the tool renders from all test-time cameras.

### Camera Path Render
``` bash
genie-render camera-path \
  --load-config outputs/<path_to_your_config.yml> \
  --camera-path-filename <camera_paths_folder> \
  --output-path edits/<output_folder> \
  --output-format images
```
-  The camera path here refers to what’s generated by the Nerfstudio viewer not your `*.ply` animation folder!

# Driving Gausses with a mesh
First thing that you need to do is to export the traingle soup from the model. We got you right there and we have prepared this command:
``` bash
genie-export --load-config outputs/<path_to_your_config.yml>
```
This will create a traingle soup in the project output folder. In this output folder create another folder called `reference_meshes` put the edits of your Gausses in this folder in the same format as for rendering. Now this is important. Make sure that `triangle_soup.ply` and `00000.ply` represent your model in the exact same state (no modifications) since we will use those two as a reference. Other `*.ply` files can be in any configuration.

Now run the script:
``` bash
genie-export ply-from-edits --load-config outputs/<path_to_your_config.yml>
```
This will drive the Gausses and will create `camera_path` folder. Now you can proceed to normal rendering mentioned above.

# Replicating results from the paper
If you want to replicate the results that we showed in the paper you can download our `.blend` filed from [here]. You will also find there all the config files we have used for training so you can use same hyperparameters as we did. There you will also find instructions on how to generate all `*.ply` fiels and how to render all animations.

# Bugs in nerfstudio 1.1.4

There were a few bugs in nerfstudio we needed to fix in order to train on Mip-NeRF 360 dataset:

File: nerfstudio/exporter/exporter_utils.py

``` python
# Lines 166-172

# Change from:
if crop_obb is not None:
    mask = crop_obb.within(point)
point = point[mask]
rgb = rgb[mask]
view_direction = view_direction[mask]
if normal is not None:
    normal = normal[mask]

# To:
if crop_obb is not None:
    mask = crop_obb.within(point)
    point = point[mask]
    rgb = rgb[mask]
    view_direction = view_direction[mask]
    if normal is not None:
        normal = normal[mask]

```

File: nerfstudio/model_components/ray_generators.py

``` python
# Lines 49-50

# Change from:
y = ray_indices[:, 1]  # row indices
x = ray_indices[:, 2]  # col indices

# To:
y = torch.clamp(ray_indices[:, 1], 0, self.image_coords.shape[0] - 1)  # row indices
x = torch.clamp(ray_indices[:, 2], 0, self.image_coords.shape[1] - 1)  # col indices

```

File: nerfstudio/utils/eval_utils.py

``` python
# Line 62

# Change from:
loaded_state = torch.load(load_path, map_location="cpu")

# To:
loaded_state = torch.load(load_path, map_location="cpu", weights_only=False)

```

# Citations
If you found this work usefull, please consider citing:

```

```

Commit message:

Added blender instead of .ply sequence for the demo

README.md, after:

# GENIE: Gaussian Encoding for Neural Radiance Fields Interactive Editing

👋 Hi there!  
If you’ve landed here looking to **edit NeRFs** (Neural Radiance Fields) you’re in the right place. This project lets you 🛠️ interactively modify NeRF scenes with ease.  
Feel free to explore 🔍, clone the repo 📦, and start experimenting 🚀. Contributions, issues, and ideas are always welcome! 💡✨

<p align="center">
  <img src="images/teaser.png" alt="Description" width="400"/>
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img src="images/Ficus_leaf_wind.gif" width="22%" />
  <img src="images/Hotdog_fly.gif" width="22%" />
  <img src="images/pillow_duck.gif" width="22%" />
  <img src="images/Rug_cup.gif" width="22%" />
</p>

# ⚙️ Installation
### Docker (preferred way)
The easiest way to run our model is using the Docker container. Simply run the command below, and everything will be set up for you automatically.
``` bash
# Build, run and enter the container
./docker/docker_run.sh
```

### Manual installation
This project is developed as an extension for Nerfstudio. To get started, please install [Nerfstudio](https://github.com/nerfstudio-project/nerfstudio/tree/2adcc380c6c846fe032b1fe55ad2c960e170a215) along with its dependencies. <br>

<p align="center">
    <!-- pypi-strip -->
    <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://docs.nerf.studio/_images/logo-dark.png">
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="https://docs.nerf.studio/_images/logo.png">
    <!-- /pypi-strip -->
    <img alt="nerfstudio" src="https://docs.nerf.studio/_images/logo.png" width="400">
    <!-- pypi-strip -->
    </picture>
    <!-- /pypi-strip -->
</p>


Install [OptiX SDK 8.1.0](https://developer.nvidia.com/designworks/optix/downloads/legacy) in `genie/knn` directory.
Then build the CUDA code by running:
``` bash
./build_optix.sh
```
> ⚠️ If the build fails, please double-check that the paths to the OptiX SDK and CUDA include directories are correct in build_optix.sh.
We have tested with OptiX 7.6 and 8.1.0. OptiX 9.0 is not supported at the moment.

Finally, install this repo with:
``` bash
pip install -e .
ns-install-cli
```
🚀 This will install the package in editable mode and kick off the Nerfstudio CLI installer to get you all set up and ready to go! 🎉

### Optional Installation
If you want to experiment 🧪 with different KNN algorithms you can install [Faiss](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/tree/main). We found GPU acceleration wasn’t working out-of-the-box, so we had to compile Faiss from source with Python bindings for it to work properly. <br>

Also, uncomment the Faiss import and two KNN classes in `genie/knn/knn_algorithms.py` to enable it. Then in `genie_config.py` you can specify different KNN.

# Running the demo
To test if everything was installed properly, you can run the `ficus` demo. Please download the data from [here] and put it in data folder.

```bash
# First train the model with
ns-train genie --data data/ficus --timestamp genie_demo

# Prepare the animation with blender
blender -b blender/ficus/ficus.blend -P blender/ficus/script.py

# Downscale and reformat animation
genie-export ply-from-obj --batch-folder blender/ficus/plys --gausses-per-face 1 --output-folder outputs/ficus/genie/genie_demo/reference_meshes --ply-mode True

# Export triangle soup
genie-export triangles --load-config outputs/ficus/genie/genie_demo/config.yml

# Bind triangle soup with animation and get final edits
genie-export ply-from-edits --load-config outputs/ficus/genie/genie_demo/config.yml

# Now you can render the animation
genie-render dataset --load-config outputs/ficus/genie/genie_demo/config.yml --rendered-output-names rgb --output-path edits/genie_demo --selected-camera-idx 50

# Render the video
ffmpeg -framerate 24 -i %05d.jpg -c:v libx264 -pix_fmt yuv420p ficus_wind.mp4
```

# Data preparation
### Synthetic data
By default, our method supports the NeRF Synthetic format. If you want to use your own data you need to put `sparse_pc.ply` in the dataset folder. For synthetic data we used [LagHash](https://github.com/theialab/lagrangian_hashes) to generate the initial point cloud but COLMAP sparse point cloud works just as fine if you don't want to train another model.

### Real data
For real data please follow [Nerfstudio data format](https://docs.nerf.studio/quickstart/data_conventions.html)
To use the MiP-NeRF 360 dataset, you'll need to generate a `transforms.json` file for each scene:
``` bash
# Do this for every dataset in the folder
cd <dataset_folder>
ns-process-data images --data . --output-dir . --skip-colmap --skip-image-processin --colmap-model-path sparse/0
```
Like with synthetic data, you'll also need to place `sparse_pc.ply` in the dataset folder to initialize the network with a sparse point cloud.

# Training the network

Example train commands:
``` bash
# For nerf synthetic
ns-train genie --data <path_to_dataset>

# For MiP-NeRF but also other real data
ns-train genie --data <path_to_dataset> \
  --pipeline.model.near-plane 0.0 \
  --pipeline.model.far-plane 1000 \
  --pipeline.model.background-color random \
  --pipeline.model.disable-scene-contraction False \
  --pipeline.model.cone-angle 0.00390625 \
  nerfstudio-data \
  --load-3D-points True \
  --downscale-factor 4
```

# Rendering results
We use [Blender](https://www.blender.org) for generating our animations. It is important to generate for each frame of your animation an `*.ply` file containing modified Gaussians obtained from the training. You can find them in the output foledr of your training under the name `step-<num_steps>_means.ply`. 

> ⚠️  It is very important to use only `*.ply` files since they don't change the order of vertices upon the save.

In the output folder of your trained model (usually named wit the timestamp) create `camera_path` folder and put your `*.ply` filed there. It is important to name them `00000.ply`, `00001.ply`, `00002.ply`, etc.

Now you are ready to go and you can start rednerin. You have two option right here:
### Dataset Render
``` bash
genie-render dataset \
  --load-config outputs/<path_to_your_config.yml> \
  --output-path edits/<output_folder> \
  --rendered-output-names rgb \
  --selected-camera-idx <num_camera_from_test_data>
```
 - If you specify a camera index, all frames will be rendered from that viewpoint.
 - If not, the tool renders from all test-time cameras.

### Camera Path Render
``` bash
genie-render camera-path \
  --load-config outputs/<path_to_your_config.yml> \
  --camera-path-filename <camera_paths_folder> \
  --output-path edits/<output_folder> \
  --output-format images
```
-  The camera path here refers to what’s generated by the Nerfstudio viewer not your `*.ply` animation folder!

# Driving Gausses with a mesh
First thing that you need to do is to export the traingle soup from the model. We got you right there and we have prepared this command:
``` bash
genie-export --load-config outputs/<path_to_your_config.yml>
```
This will create a traingle soup in the project output folder. In this output folder create another folder called `reference_meshes` put the edits of your Gausses in this folder in the same format as for rendering. Now this is important. Make sure that `triangle_soup.ply` and `00000.ply` represent your model in the exact same state (no modifications) since we will use those two as a reference. Other `*.ply` files can be in any configuration.

Now run the script:
``` bash
genie-export ply-from-edits --load-config outputs/<path_to_your_config.yml>
```
This will drive the Gausses and will create `camera_path` folder. Now you can proceed to normal rendering mentioned above.

# Replicating results from the paper
If you want to replicate the results that we showed in the paper you can download our `.blend` filed from [here]. You will also find there all the config files we have used for training so you can use same hyperparameters as we did. There you will also find instructions on how to generate all `*.ply` fiels and how to render all animations.

# Bugs in nerfstudio 1.1.4

There were a few bugs in nerfstudio we needed to fix in order to train on Mip-NeRF 360 dataset:

File: nerfstudio/exporter/exporter_utils.py

``` python
# Lines 166-172

# Change from:
if crop_obb is not None:
    mask = crop_obb.within(point)
point = point[mask]
rgb = rgb[mask]
view_direction = view_direction[mask]
if normal is not None:
    normal = normal[mask]

# To:
if crop_obb is not None:
    mask = crop_obb.within(point)
    point = point[mask]
    rgb = rgb[mask]
    view_direction = view_direction[mask]
    if normal is not None:
        normal = normal[mask]

```

File: nerfstudio/model_components/ray_generators.py

``` python
# Lines 49-50

# Change from:
y = ray_indices[:, 1]  # row indices
x = ray_indices[:, 2]  # col indices

# To:
y = torch.clamp(ray_indices[:, 1], 0, self.image_coords.shape[0] - 1)  # row indices
x = torch.clamp(ray_indices[:, 2], 0, self.image_coords.shape[1] - 1)  # col indices

```

File: nerfstudio/utils/eval_utils.py

``` python
# Line 62

# Change from:
loaded_state = torch.load(load_path, map_location="cpu")

# To:
loaded_state = torch.load(load_path, map_location="cpu", weights_only=False)

```

# Citations
If you found this work usefull, please consider citing:

```

```
